Hey everyone, thanks for coming.
And yeah, today I would like to talk a little bit about the Bluetooth mesh and what we did
in the Rust ecosystem to basically support it both on the embedded and on the Linux side.
And it's a good continuation on the topic that we had in the previous session because
it's a little bit comparable.
And there's a lot of material, so basically what I will end a little time, 20 minutes,
so what I will basically give you today is a lot of teasers and a lot of pointers and
I hope you'll get interested and could follow the links to further investigate things.
So let's get started with what the Bluetooth mesh is.
Bluetooth mesh is based on the BLE, so Bluetooth Low Energy Technology, but it's designed to
create a mesh network or devices on top of it, meaning that you should be able to connect
nodes or devices directly in dynamic hierarchies basically.
What's different between the Bluetooth mesh and the thread, for example, is that Bluetooth
mesh doesn't use any routing.
It's based on the managed flooding principle, meaning that the device will try to publish
messages to all the devices in the range and those devices will then figure out what to
do next with those messages that have been received.
And it supports publish, subscribe model as we will see in a minute.
So this is how it basically looks like.
And it's similar to what Stefan showed us with the thread.
So we have a regular node that can send and receive messages.
We have relay nodes which are only there to extend the range of the network, so they're
just relaying things that they are receiving.
And in a similar fashion as thread, we can have a low power node that are mostly sweeping
and are not active and which are accompanied by the friend nodes which will buffer messages
addressed over these low power nodes.
The stack looks something like this.
So as I said, we have a Bluetooth low energy as a basic layer.
There's a networking layer that's responsible for creating networks and exchanging keys
and all that kind of things.
And then we have an application layer which is completely defined in the Bluetooth mesh,
meaning that all our models are predefined and we can use it as we will see now.
So as I said, the models are defined.
So for example, all the things that are talking like a sensor or on-off features are defined
as a model on the application level on the mesh.
And we can have a client and a server.
Models meaning that the client and the server will exchange the messages and communicate
like that.
So how does it work then is that each device, each node can have multiple elements and those
elements can have multiple client or server models between them.
And each element has its own unique address that can be used to address an element within
the device.
We can also create more complex hierarchies by defining a group of addresses and defining
the virtual addresses which provides us with a way to create more complex topologies and
to have like a full power of published subscriber architectures on the mesh level.
And every device is part of a particular network and a particular application within that network,
meaning that all the messages that are exchanged between the devices are double encrypted with
the network and the application key.
To onboard device onto the network, we need to go through something like a provisioning
process meaning that we need to have a special node that will behave like a provisioner of
the network.
And that node will be responsible for creating and managing the keys, setting the addresses
and things like that.
So what are the use cases on top of the Bluetooth low energy?
We can have extended range and more flexible topologies.
But we can also have existing hardware.
So this is just another application on existing Bluetooth low energy hardware that can be
applied but with more flexible technologies and providing an option to connect larger
number of devices.
So I don't want to go too deep into this because it's probably a session of its own.
We heard a lot about thread here.
But this is just a small comparison between all the competing technologies in the space,
and their respective solutions in all the different layers.
So when we started playing with this, we had one goal in mind.
And that is to create a full stack, meaning that we can create application based on the
Bluetooth mesh that will cover the full stack, going from the embedded microcontrollers to
the Linux and having support for these applications in the cloud and try to do all that in Rust.
We will talk about that a bit more in a moment.
And the idea was to create a platform that could be easy to build these applications,
build on both the devices and on the cloud side, but also provide a way to ease the management
of the Bluetooth mesh networks.
But before we dive into what we did in Rust, let's go a little bit through the current
state.
And on the embedded side, the ZFR is the only thing that I found in the open source that
had support for the Bluetooth mesh.
Of course, all the vendors had their own support, as the case that can be used out of the box.
On the Linux side, everything related to the Bluetooth is basically under the BlueZ project.
And the BlueZ defines the D-Bus APIs for communicating with the Bluetooth daemon on the different
kind of things.
And of course, they have the mesh API as well for the D-Bus.
And it's used to send messages between the Bluetooth daemon and the applications that
want to talk Bluetooth mesh on the Linux side.
But the daemon is different.
So if you want to use the mesh on the Linux box, you need to install the different package
and basically disable and stop the regular Bluetooth daemon and enable the specific Bluetooth
mesh daemon.
There's also a provisioner tool included, which is called the Mesh CFG Client.
And it's an interactive tool that allows us to do all the provisioning things.
So create new networks, scan for the unprovisioned devices, add those devices to the network
and create addresses for their models.
One of the downsides of this tool is that it's too interactive.
So it's not that easily scriptable.
And it's making it hard to create reproducible networks and environments that you want to
do.
And the final state is then how do we create these applications on the Linux side that
will do this.
And there's even less examples of that on the network.
All that I could find when I started looking into it was some of the Python examples done
in the Bluetooth white papers.
And basically those are just simple Python applications that use the D-Bus interface
to basically communicate with the Mesh daemon over it.
So coming from this kind of state, you could see the end goal that we try to do is to try
to see how far can we go with this stack and try to re-implement most of these things in
Rust.
And now the question is why Rust, of course.
And we found it a very good solution for system programming.
So it basically allows us to create a statically compiled and strongly type, which means that
it has a strong performance.
We save programs without introducing runtimes and VMs.
Again, very suitable for system programming for these kind of applications.
And finally, it's a fairly modern language with a lot of good tooling.
So people coming from other areas, for example, I don't consider myself an embedded programmer,
but I feel much more comfortable playing with Rust for these use cases than I would be if
I would try to do the same thing in a C.
So first thing we did is to create a bit in Mesh create.
And that's a basic create that we try to do is to implement all the traits that are needed
for implementing the Bluetooth Mesh specification.
So as you remember, all the layers of the Bluetooth Mesh, so everything needed for representing
the application models or the networking layer traits should be defined in this one create.
And as you can see, you will see we will be able to reuse that in all different layers
of the stack.
But in order to be able to reuse it in the embedded space, this create needs to be no
STD meaning that it shouldn't rely on a standard library.
And this is a kind of go to example to show how the sensor data representation could look
like in defined by the BT Mesh create.
So Rust embedded, I think is going.
So how many people here are using Rust today for embedded programming?
Let's go.
So what's the goal here?
There's a Rust embedded working group that are dedicated to this task and its goal is
to enable people to run firmware using Rust.
So we're targeted to the microcontrollers with the small ROM capabilities without operating
system and without memory allocator.
As I said, we have only 20 minutes and there's a lot of things.
So I'm just giving you the pointers.
So there's a lot more to be said about embedded Rust, but we don't have that much time.
And the next thing, next cool thing, as I said, doing embedded with Rust is that it
enables you to do quite a lot of programming things even for the firmware.
So there's a project called Embassy which allows us to use basically async programming
for the firmers.
It provides a scheduler and the hardware obstructions that we can use to build quite capable asynchronous
applications in Rust.
And it has a hardware support for all the major hardware platforms today.
On top of that, the project that we are involved in is building on top of the Embassy and trying
to add more IoT things on top of the basic embedded developments.
So communication with the cloud in terms of MQTT or HTTP, trying to support use cases
like Blotot Mesh and try to create a more advanced application like OTA firmware updates.
And you can see here one of the examples from the workshop that we did that I'll mention
later on is, for example, how we can use the bit.image.create on the firmware to basically
every time we read the sensor data, we can package that sensor data in the proper sensor
Blotot Mesh message and send it over the Blotot.
Then on the Linux side, there's a project called Blur which is part of the Blusie Linux
official group which tries to implement all the Linux Blotot protocol stack in Rust.
And at the moment, it provides support for all the major features of the Blotot, like
GET or Blotot Love Energy.
So what we try to do here is to provide support for the Blotot Mesh in a similar way as the
rest of the Blur works.
So again, nice thing about Rust is that you can use a lot of crates and existing technologies
that are there for different use cases.
So for example, a Blur uses a Tokyo runtime, a very frequently used runtime for building
all kind of server applications in Rust and communicates with the Mesh daemon over the
using the deepest crate.
The good thing is, and that was the part of the plan, is to use the bit.image.create here
as well to use for the Mesh traits that we would need it.
So this is the quick architecture of how things work on the Linux.
So I hope you can see it well.
So you have a Mesh daemon which communicates directly with the devices.
It has its own state in the Mesh config and the Mesh storage volumes.
And it communicates using the system D-Bus to a random application, being the gateway
application or some device simulator on the Linux as well.
But the good thing is that you can see here is that, and this is one of the things that
I personally like a lot about using Rust for these use cases, is that this code running
on Linux looks pretty much similar, like the code running on the firmware.
So here we are receiving the Blotot message.
We are parsing it.
We are creating a JSON out of it and sending it over the MQTT to the cloud.
But it's very easy for a single person to jump back and forth over the different stack
layers and using the similar crates and similar style code.
Then it would be if we go from writing a C for the firmware and then a Python code for
the gateway and then doing something in Java in the cloud, for example.
So the Mesh support is not officially landed in Blur.
And this is all my fault due to my laziness and other priorities.
But hopefully this PR will be merged in the coming weeks, let's say.
The final part of the project that we have been building is to build a kind of IoT friendly
cloud platform, again, done in Rust.
Here we try to provide all the services that your typical IoT application is needing.
So being able to do a lot of connectivity, having a capable device registry, and being
able to integrate further into the cloud applications and using digital training and all these kind
of things on the other side.
But again, I'm coming back to the same thing.
So there's a thing called payload converter in the cloud that can actually intercept our
messages coming from the gateways.
And if you can remember, in the previous example, we already parsed the Bluetooth messages and
sent them as a JSON.
But if your gateway is sending just the row bytes, you can do that thing on the cloud,
again with the same crates and with a very similar code.
So we will parse the bytes, get the message, do some JSON processing and forward that message
deeper, deeper into the cloud.
So we were playing with this for a while.
And then there was a chance to actually try to put this all into the work.
At the EclipseCon, we had a hackathon and a workshop where we tried to do something
to cover the whole area with a Bluetooth mesh network, provide the micro bits for people
to play around with, and provide some basic applications in the cloud that will talk to
each other.
But the basic big architecture looked like this.
So we have a public sandbox for our drug cloud consisting of Kafka and all this kind of stuff.
And we wrote a gateway based on the bluer.
We provided some examples of how to use micro bits with the Rust embedded drug device and
the embassy and provided a couple of applications that will talk to the cloud using the Web
socket in the background.
So just a quick recap of how this architecture looks on the firmware.
So you have a couple of layers, the embassy and the Bluetooth radio on the bottom.
Then we have a drug device and the BT mesh support next one.
And on top of that, we can write our own application that will do things with these messages.
On the gateway side, we implemented the gateway using the bluer and we also tried to use some
of the latest edge technologies to deploy and manage those gateways.
So trying to use a micro shift which is the latest version of the single node Kubernetes
cluster paired with the open cluster management to deploy these gateways to appropriate nodes.
And I must say to my surprise, it all worked pretty well.
So we had a four or five gateways based on the Intel Nux and some Raspberry Pis.
Those Raspberry Pis didn't run the Kubernetes.
We used the basic Podman and the Docker images to run the gateways.
And that provided a very good coverage of a very large space.
What we needed to do is to provide a couple of relay nodes.
You can see on this other picture is to just to basically extend the range over some longer
corridors that were there.
But everything worked pretty good from this perspective.
So that's all what I have to cover today.
So as I said, there's a lot of teasers, we didn't get into anything too much deeply.
But these are the communities.
So hit us on the DrawGaioty Metrics channel.
That's where we all hang and are happy to talk about these things.
If you're interested in EBCI, I would suggest to take a look at that and the bluer thing,
hopefully with the official bit image support very soon.
Thanks.
Thank you.